Ho simulation simple scenario (#51)
hassanobeid1994/tr_b_causal_2020: notebooks/working/Simple_Simulation.md

        ("household_size", "utility_driving"), 
#         ("household_income", "utility_driving"), 
        ("num_cars", "utility_driving"), 
        ("cross_bay", "utility_driving"), 
        
        
        ("total_travel_distance", "total_travel_time"), 
        ("total_travel_distance", "total_travel_cost"), 
    ]
)

# draw return a graphviz `dot` object, which jupyter can render
drive_alone_graph.draw()
```

## Distributional regression
Assume univariate linear approximation for the relationship between travel distance and travel time/cost. Turns out it's not a horrible assumption.

```python
def fit_regression(X, y, data, plotting = True):
    data_x = sm.add_constant(data[X])
    data_y = data[y]

    model = sm.OLS(data_y, data_x)
    
    results = model.fit()
    
    if plotting:
        fig = plt.figure(figsize=(12,8))
        fig = sm.graphics.plot_regress_exog(results, X[0], fig=fig)
    
    return results
```

```python
## Regress travel cost on travel distance

cost_on_distance_reg = fit_regression(X=['total_travel_distance'], 
                                      y = ['total_travel_cost'], data=drive_alone_df, plotting = True)

> cost_on_distance_reg.summary()

Reviewer: Hmm, from the plots travel cost looks categorical (hence the distinct diagonal lines in the plot of the residuals vs travel distance. You could confirm by checking out `drive_alone_df['total_travel_cost'].value_counts()`

Perhaps you should use an MNL instead of a linear regression for predicting travel distance?

```

```python
## Regress travel time on travel distance

time_on_distance_reg = fit_regression(X=['total_travel_distance'], 
                                      y = ['total_travel_time'], data=drive_alone_df, plotting = True)

time_on_distance_reg.summary()
```

### Simulate travel time and cost based on the distributional regression

```python
## residuals spread -- assuming homoscedasticity
time_on_dist_std = time_on_distance_reg.resid.std()
cost_on_dist_std = cost_on_distance_reg.resid.std()

sample_size = len(drive_alone_df)
```

```python
total_travel_time_sim = ( time_on_distance_reg.params[0] + 
                         time_on_distance_reg.params[1]*drive_alone_df['total_travel_distance']

>                         + np.random.normal(loc=0, scale=time_on_dist_std, size = sample_size) )

Reviewer: Before simulating the various variables, I would suggest adding a call to `np.random.seed` to make the results of the simulations reproducible.

total_travel_cost_sim = ( cost_on_distance_reg.params[0] + 
                         cost_on_distance_reg.params[1]*drive_alone_df['total_travel_distance']
                        + np.random.normal(loc=0, scale=cost_on_dist_std, size = sample_size) )
```

### Create a simulation dataframe

```python
simulation_df = drive_alone_df.copy()
simulation_df['total_travel_time'] = total_travel_time_sim
simulation_df['total_travel_cost'] = total_travel_cost_sim
```

### Simulate the utility equation based on hypothetical parameters

```python
simulation_df.columns
```

```python
## Assumed coefficients for above columns
coeffs = np.array([-.5, -1.5, 3, 5, 2, -7 ])
asc_drive = 6.
```

```python
utilities = asc_drive + np.dot( simulation_df, coeffs) + np.random.normal(loc=0, scale = 1, size = sample_size)

simulation_df['utilities'] = utilities
```

## Estimation

Note that here, I'm treating the utilities as an observed quantity that I'm trying to estimate. This will get more complicated as we include different modes and actually try to maximize the correct likelihood function. 

> The thing I need to point out here is that irrespective of our causal graph, we will always recover the paramters in coeffs (defined above) when we run the regression. The question becomes, are the coefficients on each of the variables (the true coefficients) causal? That depends on the causal graph:

Reviewer: > [...] irrespective of our causal graph, we will always recover the paramters in coeffs (defined above) when we run the regression.

Why is this believed to be true?

Author: @timothyb0912 based on what I've done so far and my knowledge of things. I know you have an idea/counter-example in mind, so I want to discuss that with you.

- In the case of independent variables, the true causal effect of distance is the 0.1, the same value in the coeffs array. Thus, running a regression on all the variables in this case would return the true causal estimate. 

> - In the case where travel cost and travel time are descendents of distance, the true causal effect of distance becomes: 0.1 - 0.5*(1.28) - 1.5*(0.22) = -0.87. We will only recover this value if we omit travel distance and travel time from the utility equation. Alternatively, we can keep them in the equation, but then don't assign the coefficient for distance any causal interpretation, and post-process the results (and make parametric assumptions!) to calculate the true causal effect. 

Reviewer: These numbers no longer match the example shown in the code though I imagine they once did. I think the needed edit is
```suggestion
- In the case where travel cost and travel time are descendents of distance, the true causal effect of distance becomes: `3 - 0.5*(1.28) - 1.5*(0.22) = 2.03`. We will only recover this value if we omit travel distance and travel time from the utility equation. Alternatively, we can keep them in the equation, but then don't assign the coefficient for distance any causal interpretation, and post-process the results (and make parametric assumptions!) to calculate the true causal effect. 
```

    """Fit PCA while holding out a fraction of the dataset.
    """

#     # choose solver for alternating minimization
#     if nonneg:
#         solver = censored_nnlstsq
#     else:
    solver = censored_lstsq

    # create masking matrix
    if M is None:
        M = np.random.rand(*data.shape) > p_holdout

    # initialize U randomly
    if nonneg:
        U = np.random.rand(data.shape[0], rank)
    else:
        U = np.random.randn(data.shape[0], rank)

    # fit pca/nmf
    for itr in range(iterations):
        Vt = solver(U, data, M)
        U = solver(Vt.T, data.T, M.T).T

    # return result and test/train error
    resid = np.dot(U, Vt) - data
    train_err = np.mean(resid[M]**2)
    test_err = np.mean(resid[~M]**2)
    return U, Vt, train_err, test_err, M, resid
```

```python
X_columns = [
    'total_travel_time',
       'total_travel_cost', 
            ]

X = np.array((simulation_df[X_columns] - simulation_df[X_columns].mean())/simulation_df[X_columns].std())

# X_raw = np.array([s2,s3]).reshape((1000,2))
# X =( X_raw - X_raw.mean(axis=0) )/X_raw.std(axis=0)

U, Vt, train_err, test_err, M, resid = cv_pca(data=X, rank=2)
train_err, test_err
```

> ### Check PCA

Reviewer: To check one's PCA (and to check one's models in general), one suggestion I have is to try to always include at least one check that is essentially just a plot of the original data vs the simulated data.

So for the PCA, I might (for each variable) do something like plot the simulated vs observed distributions. For e.g. try looking at a kernel density estimate (or empirical, cumulative distribution function) of the PCA-simulated travel costs vs the observed travel costs.
